In this video, we're going to start working on hashing the user's password before we send it off to
our database to be saved.
In this video, I want to give you a quick reminder on why we hash passwords in general and how the
entire process works.
If you are already familiar with password hashing, go ahead and skip this video and take a look at
the implementation in the next one.
Otherwise, stick around and let's get to it.
All right.
So in this diagram right here, I'm showing you a bad approach.
This is something that we are currently doing inside of our app, but is something that we do not want
to do.
So we need to replace our current implementation.
So at present our React application or right now technically postman, we're making a request to sign
up to our app and we are including an email and a password.
At present we are creating a new user document out of that, using the email of test at test and a password
of whatever gets sent.
In this case, we're singing its word pass.
So we create a new user document and persist that to MongoDB.
So our password is sitting inside of this user's collection in plain text.
This is a very bad approach because if anyone ever got access to our MongoDB database, they would see
all the emails and passwords of our users.
Now we don't really care about someone necessarily logging into our application.
It's more that if a user or if some malicious person gets access to all these email and passwords,
our users might use the same email and password combination to log on to many other services.
And so a malicious user could take test at test and word pass and then go and try to log on to my banking
website and they might possibly successfully log in.
So again, under no scenario, under no circumstance do we ever store our passwords in plain text as
we are currently doing.
So how are we going to fix this?
Well, we're going to introduce password hashing.
This is a two step process that spans over the sign up and sign in flows.
So let's first focus on what occurs during sign up.
This is what we are about to implement right now.
So once again, our React app is going to make requests to sign up.
And maybe once again, it's an email of test at test and a password of word pass.
We are going to take that password and hash it.
So we're going to hash the password word pass.
When we hash, this string is going to produce a unique series of characters that are unique just for
that word right there or that very particular string.
So the word or the string of word pass might produce this hash string right here.
If you want to get more information about the hashing process, I encourage you to look it up online.
Right now, I'm just giving you a very quick overview on what we're going to be doing.
We then take this hash password and store it inside of our database instead of the original plaintext
one.
So now we only have the email and the hash password, not the original one.
So then we go ahead and create the new user.
Really, let's say this diagram should be a little bit closer to that right there.
So now inside of our database, we've only got the hash password with the hash passwords.
There is no way or no easy way, we should say, to somehow figure out what the original password was.
So if some malicious user somehow got access to this email password combination, in theory, hopefully
there would not be much damage done.
Now, again, there are scenarios where even a hash password can have some negative consequences.
And in general, we don't want anyone getting access to our data at all.
But if it's some malicious user does get access to this hash password, it's not as big a problem.
Well, that's just the signup process.
How do we actually make use of the hash password at some point in time in the future?
Well, let's imagine the sign in flow that we're going to be implementing very shortly.
So once again, maybe our React application sends a request to sign into our app.
When a user signs in, they're going to send us their email and password.
So as soon as we get that, we are going to hash the password in the exact same way that we did when
user signed up initially.
So we'll hash the password and we once again that get that same identical string.
We're then going to take a look and try to find a user saved inside of our database with the same email
as the one that was just submitted.
Test, that test.
So we'll find that record right there.
Now, at this point in time, we've got the stored hashed password and we've got the hash version,
version of the password that the user just applied to us.
We are going to check and see if the hash passwords are equal to each other.
If they are equal to each other, that means that the user must have supplied the correct password.
And then at that point in time, we're going to say, okay, you are or you have supplied some valid
login credentials.
We now consider you to be signed into our application.
So that's it.
That's the flow.
Now, I went through this really quickly, so if any of this is still kind of confusing, I would encourage
you to do a little bit of research.
Again, I'm just giving you a quick reminder on how the stuff is working.
Hopefully you have seen password hashing at least once in the past before.
Well, let's take a pause right here.
Now that we got this review in place, we're going to start implementing the password hashing flow in
the next video.